I know this doesn’t make any sense,” breathes Tris Prior (Shailene Woodley) during Insurgent’s flamboyantly muddled finale, “but you have to trust me.” You could hardly ask for a more honest line of dialogue than that: it lays out the central problem of this second instalment in the Divergent science-fiction series, and also how it’s best surmounted.

Insurgent, which is based on the second in a series of best-selling young-adult novels by Veronica Roth, is Woodley’s show. Watching her is like watching Sigourney Weaver in Alien: you’re witnessing the skin-prickling spectacle, better and more satisfying than any special effect, of an actress turning into a star. 

So whenever the stitching of Insurgent’s plot starts to unravel, as it frequently does, you check on the 23-year-old lead, register her physicality and poise, whisper-light confidence, and eyes that can hold a 1,000-seater auditorium in their thrall, and reassure yourself that everything must be okay. Even though it often really isn’t.

Because while its lead actress is a force to be reckoned with, Insurgent is certainly no Alien – nor a Hunger Games, nor a Maze Runner. Instead, it plays like a listless mash-up of every Young Adult franchise movie you’ve ever seen – domineering rulers, anguished, system-smashing teens, and all the purposeful striding through rubble you can handle. 

Woodley’s character, Tris, is an odd-woman-out in the highly regimented future-earth, where what’s left of humanity is divided into five variously skilled factions: Dauntless are brave, Candour are honest, Erudite are smart, and so on.

In the first film, Tris was earmarked as a troublemaker – as a ‘divergent’, with multiple talents, she doesn’t fit the scheme – before thwarting a plot by Kate Winslet’s clipboard-wielding termagant to exterminate her parents’ faction.

Now she’s a fugitive, hiding out in a geodesic yurt with Octavia Spencer and a troupe of younger allies: hunky Four (Theo James), evasive Peter (Miles Teller, a former Woodley love-interest in the Young Adult romance The Spectacular Now) and her elder brother Caleb (Ansel Elgort, ditto, but in The Fault in our Stars).

Winslet’s troops turn up, and a ramshackle chase ensues as Tris and friends dart from faction to faction, spurred on by…well, it’s never exactly quite clear what. The script expends so much energy wading through jargon that character motivations are lost in the trudge.

What we do know is the Erudites have come to possess a special, ancient box that only Tris can unlock by passing a series of five virtual-reality tests. This twinkling MacGuffin doesn’t appear in the book, and was presumably introduced as a plot-tidying device – but the fact that the entire film is now geared towards its main character sitting an exam only draws attention to its high-school-sized dramatic frame of reference. 

Elsewhere, there’s a high-stakes game of truth or dare, an argument in a canteen, and a very headmistress-like dressing down from Spencer’s character in her office. The genius of Twilight, the first young-adult blockbuster franchise in the current wave, was in making a high-school angst feel like the end of the world. Insurgent does the opposite. 

Fans of the luxuriously realised realm of Panem, where the Hunger Games films play out, will notice where the tricks have been missed. The Divergent films take place in and around a half-demolished Chicago, kept separate from the rest of the world by a towering electric fence.

But the potential for creating something visually memorable out of this crazily evocative setting is mostly squandered. Instead, it’s all glass doors and shiny white corridors: less a dystopian police state than the kind of place you might go to find someone to punch up your brand’s social media strategy. 

At least the virtual-reality sequences are better: in one, the city dissolves upwards into the air, as if each skyscraper were a giant Alka-Seltzer tablet. If only the rest of the film showed the same appetite for deconstruction.